How Good Is NLP? A Sober Look at NLP Tasks through the
Lens of Social Impact

Zhijing Jin
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
T¨ubingen, Germany
zjin@tue.mpg.de

Geeticka Chauhan
MIT
geeticka@mit.edu

Brian Tse
Oxford
briantsemanhei@gmail.com

Mrinmaya Sachan
ETH Z¨urich
msachan@ethz.ch

Rada Mihalcea
University of Michigan
mihalcea@umich.edu

Abstract

Recent years have seen many breakthroughs
in natural language processing (NLP), transi-
tioning it from a mostly theoretical ﬁeld to one
with many real-world applications. Noting the
rising number of applications of other machine
learning and AI techniques with pervasive so-
cietal impact, we anticipate the rising impor-
tance of developing NLP technologies for so-
cial good. Inspired by theories in moral phi-
losophy and global priorities research, we aim
to promote a guideline for social good in the
context of NLP. We lay the foundations via
the moral philosophy deﬁnition of social good,
propose a framework to evaluate the direct and
indirect real-world impact of NLP tasks, and
adopt the methodology of global priorities re-
search to identify priority causes for NLP re-
search. Finally, we use our theoretical frame-
work to provide some practical guidelines for
future NLP research for social good.1

1

Introduction

Advances on multiple NLP fronts have given rise
to a plethora of applications that are now integrated
into our daily lives. NLP-based intelligent agents
like Amazon Echo and Google Home have entered
millions of households (Voicebot, 2020). NLP tools
are now prevalent on phones, in cars, and in many
daily services such as Google search and electronic
health record analysis (Townsend, 2013).

In the current COVID-19 context, NLP has al-
ready had important positive social impact in the
face of a public health crisis. When the pandemic
broke out, Allen AI collected the CORD-19 dataset
(Wang et al., 2020) with the goal of helping public
health experts efﬁciently sift through the myriad of

1Our data and code are available at http://github.
com/zhijing-jin/nlp4sg_acl2021.
In addition,
we curate a list of papers and resources on NLP for so-
cial good at https://github.com/zhijing-jin/
NLP4SocialGood_Papers.

COVID-19 research papers that emerged in a short
time period. Subsequently, NLP services such as
Amazon Kendra were deployed to help organize
the research knowledge around COVID-19 (Bhatia
et al., 2020). The NLP research community worked
on several problems like the question-answering
and summarization system CAiRE-COVID (Su
et al., 2020), the expressive interviewing conversa-
tional system (Welch et al., 2020) and annotation
schemas to help ﬁght COVID-19 misinformation
online (Alam et al., 2020; Hossain et al., 2020).

As NLP transits from theory into practice and
into daily lives, unintended negative consequences
that early theoretical researchers did not anticipate
have also emerged, from the toxic language of Mi-
crosoft’s Twitter bot Tay (Shah and Chokkattu,
2016), to the leak of privacy of Amazon Alexa
(Chung et al., 2017). A current highly-debated
topic in NLP ethics is GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020),
whose risks and harms include encoding gender
and racist biases (Bender et al., 2021).

It is now evident that we must consider the neg-
ative and positive impacts of NLP as two sides of
the same coin, a consequence of how NLP and
more generally AI pervade our daily lives. The
consideration of the negative impacts of AI has en-
gendered the recent and popular interdisciplinary
ﬁeld of AI ethics, which puts forth issues such as
algorithmic bias, fairness, transparency and equity
with an aim to provide recommendations for ethical
development of algorithms.

Highly inﬂuential works in AI ethics include
(Buolamwini and Gebru, 2018; Mitchell et al.,
2019; Raji et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2019; Blodgett
et al., 2020). AI for social good (AI4SG) (Tomaˇsev
et al., 2020) is a related sub-ﬁeld that beneﬁts from
results of AI ethics and while keeping ethical prin-
ciples as a pre-requisite, has the goal of creating
positive impact and addressing society’s biggest
challenges. Work in this space includes (Wang

1
2
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
4
2
 
 
]
L
C
.
s
c
[
 
 
2
v
9
5
3
2
0
.
6
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

et al., 2020; Bhatia et al., 2020; Killian et al., 2019;
Lampos et al., 2020).

Active conversations about ethics and social
good have expanded broadly, in the NLP commu-
nity as well as the broader AI and ML commu-
nities. Starting with early discussions in works
such as (Hovy and Spruit, 2016; Leidner and Pla-
chouras, 2017), the communities introduced the
ﬁrst workshop on ethics in NLP (Hovy et al., 2017)
and the AI for social good workshop (Luck et al.,
2018), which inspired various follow-up workshops
at venues like ICML and ICLR. The upcoming
NLP for Positive Impact Workshop (Field et al.,
2020) ﬁnds inspiration from these early papers
and workshops. In 2020, NeurIPS required all re-
search papers to submit broader impact statements
(Castelvecchi, 2020; Gibney, 2020). NLP confer-
ences followed suit and introduced optional ethical
and impact statements, starting with ACL in 2021
(Association for Computational Linguistics, 2021).
With the growing impact of our models in daily
lives, we need comprehensive guidelines for fol-
lowing ethical standards to result in positive impact
and prevent unnecessary societal harm. (Tomaˇsev
et al., 2020) provide general guidelines for suc-
cessful AI4SG collaborations through the lens
of United Nations (UN) sustainable development
goals (SDGs) (United Nations, 2015) and (Hovy
and Spruit, 2016; Leidner and Plachouras, 2017)
begin the ethics discussions in NLP. However, there
is room for iteration in terms of presenting a com-
prehensive picture of NLP for social good, with
an evaluation framework and guidelines. At the
moment, researchers eager to make a beneﬁcial
contribution need to base their research agenda
on intuition and word of mouth recommendations,
rather than a scientiﬁc evaluation framework.

To this end, our paper presents a modest effort
to the understanding of social good, and sketches
thinking guidelines and heuristics for NLP for so-
cial good. Our main goal is to answer the question:

Given a speciﬁc researcher or team with
skills s, and the set of NLP technologies
T they can work on, what is the best
technology t ∈ T for them to optimize
the social good impact I?

In order to answer this overall question, we take

a multidisciplinary approach in our paper:

• §2 relies on theories in moral philosophy to
approach what is social good versus bad (i.e.,

the sign and rough magnitude of impact I for
a direct act a);

• §3 relies on causal structure models as a
framework to estimate I for t ∈ T , consider-
ing that t can be an indirect cause of impact;
• §4 relies on concepts from global priorities
research and economics to introduce a high-
level framework to choose a technology t that
optimizes the social impact I;

• §5 applies the above tools to analyze several
example NLP directions, and provides a prac-
tical guide on how to reﬂect on the social im-
pact of NLP.

We acknowledge the iterative nature of a newly
emerging ﬁeld in NLP for social good, requir-
ing continuing discussions on deﬁnitions and the
development of ethical frameworks and guide-
lines. Echoing the history of scientiﬁc develop-
ment (Kuhn, 2012), the goal of our work is not to
provide a perfect, quantitative, and deterministic
answer about how to maximize social good with
our NLP applications. The scope of our work is
to take one step closer to a comprehensive under-
standing, through high-level philosophies, thinking
frameworks, together with heuristics and examples.

2 What is social good?

Deﬁning social good can be controversial. For ex-
ample, if we deﬁne saving energy as social good,
then what about people who get sick because of not
turning on the air-conditioner on a cold day? There-
fore, social good is context-dependent, relevant to
people, times, and states of nature (Broome, 2017).
This section is to provide a theoretical framework
about the social impact I for a direct act a.

2.1 Moral philosophy theories

We can observe that for some acts, it is relatively
certain to judge whether the impact is positive or
negative. For example, solving global hunger is in
general a positive act. Such judgement is called
intuitionalism (Sidgwick, 1874), a school of moral
philosophy.

There are many areas of social impact that can-
not receive consensus by intuitions. To ﬁnd ana-
lytical solutions to these debatable topics, several
moral philosophies have been proposed. We intro-
duce below three categories of philosophical per-
spectives to judge moral laws (Kagan, 2018), and
provide the percentage of professional philosophers
who support the theory (Bourget and Chalmers,

2014):

1. Deontology: emphasizes duties or rules, en-

dorsed by 25.9% philosophers;

2. Consequentialism: emphasizes consequences
of acts, endorsed by 23.6% philosophers;
3. Virtue ethics: emphasizes virtues and moral
character, endorsed by 18.2% philosophers.

Note that the above three schools, deontology, con-
sequentialism, and virtue ethics, follows the stan-
dard textbook introductions for normative ethics in
the analytic philosophy tradition. It is also possible
for future research to consider different perspec-
tives while deﬁning social good.

A practical guide for using these philosophies.
The three perspectives provide us dimensions to
think about the impact I of an act a, so that the
ﬁnal decision is (hopefully) more reliable than one
single thought which is subject to biases. Such de-
composition practices are often used in highly com-
plicated analyses (e.g., business decisions), such as
radar charts to rate a decision/candidate or SMART
goals.

A practical guide for using moral philosophies
to judge an act a is to think along each of the three
perspectives, collect estimations of how good the
act a is from the three dimensions, and merge them.
For example, using NLP for healthcare to save lives
can be good from all three perspectives, and thus it
is an overall social good act.

When merging judgements from the above philo-
sophical views, there can be tradeoffs, such as sac-
riﬁcing one life for ﬁve lives in the Trolley prob-
lem (Thomson, 1976), which scores high on con-
sequentialism but low on deontology and virtue
ethics. One solution by the moral uncertainty the-
ory (MacAskill et al., 2020) is to favor acts with
more balanced judgements on all criteria, and re-
ject acts that are completely unacceptable on any
criterion.

2.2 Principles for future AI

Many agencies from academia, government, and
industries have proposed principles for future AI
(Jobin et al., 2019), which can be regarded as a
practical guide by deontology. Zeng et al. (2019)
surveyed the principles of the governance of AI
proposed by 27 agencies. The main areas are as
follows (with keywords):

• Humanity: beneﬁcial, well-being, human
right, dignity, freedom, education, human-
friendly.

• Privacy: personal information, data protec-
tion, explicit conﬁrmation, control of the data,
notice and consent.

• Security: cybersecurity, hack, conﬁdential.
• Fairness: justice, bias, discrimination.
• Safety: validation, test, controllability.
• Accountability: responsibility.
• Transparency: explainable, predictable, intel-

ligible.

• Collaboration: partnership, dialog.
• Share: share, equal.
• AGI: superintelligence.

3 Evaluating the indirect impact of NLP

Given the general moral guide to judge an act with
direct impacts, we now step towards the second
stage – understanding the downstream impact of
scientiﬁc research which typically has indirect im-
pacts. For example, it is not easily tractable to
estimate the impact of some linguistic theories. To
sketch a solution, this section will ﬁrst classify NLP
tasks by the dimension of theory→application, and
then provide an evaluation framework for I of a
technology t that may have indirect real-life im-
pacts.

3.1 Classifying tasks from upstream to

downstream

To evaluate each NLP research topic, we propose
four stages in the theory→application develop-
ment, as shown in Figure 1, and categorize the
570 long papers from ACL 20202 according to the
four stages in Figure 2. Details of the annotation
are in Appendix A. The four stages are as follows.

Stage 1. Fundamental theories. Fundamental
theories are the foundations of knowledge, such
as linguistic theories by Noam Chomsky. In ACL
2020, the most prevalent topic for papers in Stage 1
is linguistics theory in Figure 2. Importantly, Stage
1’s main goal is the advancement of knowledge,
and to widen the potentials for later-stage research.

Stage 2. Building block tools. Moving one step
from theory towards applications is the research
on building block tools, which serves as important
building blocks and toolboxes for downstream tech-
nologies. The most frequently researched Stage-
2 topics at ACL 2020 are information extraction,
model design, and interpretability (in Figure 2).

2https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/

events/acl-2020/#2020-acl-main

Figure 2: Distribution of ACL 2020 papers by the four
stages. For each stage, we highlight the top several
topics of the papers. We only list the top one topic
for Stage 1 due to visual space limit. Abbreviations
of technologies include Information Extraction (IE), In-
terpretability (Interpret.), machine translation (Trans.),
question answering (QA), and misinformation (Mis-
info.).

time for human fact-checkers, to aid them in more
quickly detecting fake news through the increasing
number of digital news articles being published.

The impact of more user free time is varied. In
the case of healthcare, NLP can free up time for
more personalized patient care, or allow free time
for activities of choice, such as spending time on
passion projects or more time with family. We
recognize these varied impacts of NLP deployment,
and recommend user productivity as one way to
measure it.

Note that there can be positive as well as neg-
ative impact associated with rising productivity,
and the polarity can be decided according to Sec-
tion 2.1. Typical positive impacts of NLP technol-
ogy include better healthcare and well-being, and
in some cases it indirectly helps with avoiding exis-
tential risks, sustainability, and so on. Typical neg-
ative impacts include more prevalent surveillance,
propaganda, breach of privacy, and so on. For ex-
ample, intelligent bots can improve efﬁciency at
work (to beneﬁt economics), and bring generally
better well-being for households, but they might
leak user privacy (Chung et al., 2017).

Thus, estimating the overall end impact of a tech-
nology t in the Stage 4 needs to accumulate over a
set of aspects AS:

I(t) =

scaleas(t) · impactas(t) ,

(1)

(cid:88)

as∈AS

where scaleas(t) is the usage scale of applica-
tions of technology t used in the aspect as, and

Figure 1: Stream of technology development from the-
ory to application with end impacts. The end impacts
are a distribution of use cases and their corresponding
weighted impacts.

Stage 3. Applicable tools. Applicable tools are
pre-commercialized NLP systems which can serve
as the backbones of real-world applications. This
category includes NLP tasks such as dialog re-
sponse generation, question answering, and ma-
chine translation. The most common research top-
ics in this category are dialog, machine translation,
and question answering (in Figure 2).

Stage 4. Deployed applications/products. De-
ployed applications often build upon tools in Stage
3, and wrap them with user interfaces, customer
services, and business models. Typical examples
of Stage-4 technologies include Amazon Echo,
Google Translate, and so on. The top three top-
ics of ACL 2020 papers in this category are ways
to address misinformation (e.g., a fact checker for
news bias), dialog, and NLP for healthcare.

3.2 Estimating impact

Direct impacts of Stage-4 technologies. A di-
rect impact of NLP development is allowing users
more free time. This is evident in automatic ma-
chine translation, which saves the effort and time of
human translators, or in NLP for healthcare, which
allows doctors to more quickly sift through patient
history. Automatic fake news detection frees up

Major Classes of Use CasesProbability of Usage * Impact1Fundamental Theories(Linguistic theory, etc.)2Building Block Tools(Syntactic parsing)3Applicable Tools(Dialog response generator,machine translation model)4Deployed Applications/Products(Alexa, Google Home)Impact on Human LivesAvoidingexistential risksSustainabilityHuman rights, diversity, equalityWell-beingEducationHelping basichuman needsSaving livesExample Positive Use CasesViolenceWeaponsSuppression of free speechSurveillanceExample Negative Use CasesPropagandaHarming PeopleStream of TechnologyDevelopmentMisinfo.HealthcareDialogDialogTrans.QALinguisticsIEModelInterpret.Figure 3: Viewing the theory→application process
with a structural causal model.

stages (§3.1)

broader impact statements, it will be useful and im-
portant for researchers to have practical guidelines
on evaluating the impact of their NLP tasks.

We ﬁrst introduce some thinking steps to esti-

mate the impact of research on an NLP task t:

(S1) Classify the NLP task t into one of the four

(S2) If t is in Stage 4, think of the set of aspects
AS that t will impact, the scale of applica-
tions, and aspect-speciﬁc impact magnitude.
Finally, estimate impact using Eq. (1).
(S2’) If t is in Stage 1-3, think of its descendant
technologies, their success rate, and the con-
tribution of t to them. Finally, estimate impact
using Eq. (1) and (2).

Next, we introduce some high-level heuristics to

facilitate fast decisions:

(H1) For earlier stages (i.e., Stage 1-2), it is chal-
lenging to quantify the exact social impact.
Their overall impact tends to lean towards
positive as they create more knowledge that
beneﬁts future technology development.
(H2) Developers of Stage-4 technologies should be
the most careful about ethical concerns. Enu-
merate the use cases, and estimate the scale
of each usage by thinking of the stakeholders,
economic impact, and users in the market. Fi-
nally, evaluate the ﬁnal impact before proceed-
ing. (E.g., if the ﬁnal impact is very negative,
then abandon or do it with restrictions).
(H3) For Stage-3 technologies, if their Stage-4 de-
scendants are tractable to enumerate and es-
timate for their impacts, then aggregate the
descendants’ impacts by Eq. 2. Otherwise,
treat them like (H1).

4 Deciding research priority

There are many directions for expansion of our
efforts for social good; however, due to limited
resources and availability of support for each re-
searcher, we provide a research priority list. In
this section, we are effectively trying to answer the
overall question proposed in Section 1. Speciﬁ-
cally, we adopt the practice in the research ﬁeld
global priorities (GP) (MacAskill, 2015; Greaves
and McAskill, 2017). We ﬁrst introduce the high-
level decision-making framework in Section 4.1,
and then formulate these principles using technical
terms in Section 4.2.

impactas(t) is the impact of t in this aspect.

Indirect
impacts of early stage technologies.
Although the direct impact of Stage-4 technologies
can be estimated by Eq. (1), it is difﬁcult to cal-
culate the impact of a technology in earlier stages
(i.e., Stage 1-3).

We can approach the calculation of indirect im-
pacts I of an early-stage technology t by a struc-
tural causal model. As shown in the causal graph
G in Figure 3, each technology t is in a causal
chain from its parent vertex set PA(t) (i.e., up-
stream technologies that directly causes the inven-
tion of t), to its children vertex set (i.e., downstream
technologies directly resulting from t). Formally,
we denote a directed (causal) path in G as a se-
quence of distinct vertices (t1, t2, . . . , tn) such that
ti+1 ∈ CH(ti) for all i = 1, . . . , n − 1. We call
tn a descendant of t1. After enumerating all paths,
we denote the set of all descendants of t as DE(t).
Speciﬁcally, we denote all descendant nodes in
Stage 4 as Stage-4 DE(t).

Hence, the impact of any technology t is the sum

of impact of all its descendants in Stage 4:

I(t) =

(cid:88)

x∈Stage-4 DE(t)

p(x) · cx(t) · I(x) ,

(2)

where p(x) is the probability that the descendent
technology x can be successfully developed, cx(t)
is the contribution of t to x, and I(x) can be cal-
culated by Eq. (1). This formula can also be inter-
preted from the light of do-calculus (Pearl, 1995)
as P (X|do(t)) − P (X), for X ∈ Stage-4 DE(t),
which means the effect of intervention do(t) on
Stage 4 descendants.

Note that Eq. (1) and (2) are meta frameworks,
and we leave it to future work to utilize these for
assessing the social impact of their work.

3.3 Takeaways for NLP tasks

With the growing interest of AI and NLP publica-
tion venues (e.g., NeurIPS, ACL) in ethical and

1234t......CH(t)......Stage-4 DE(t)PA(t)Stage4.1

Important/Neglected/Tractable (INT)
framework

Notation Meaning

Our thinking framework to address the research
priority follows the practice of existing cost-beneﬁt
analysis in GP (MacAskill, 2015; Greaves and
McAskill, 2017), which aligns with the norms in
established ﬁelds such as development economics,
welfare economics, and public policy.

We draw an analogy between the existing GP
research and NLP for social good. Basically, GP
addresses the following problem: given, for exam-
ple, 500 billion US dollars (which is the annual
worldwide expenditure on social good), what prior-
ity areas should we spend on? Inspired by this prac-
tical setting, we form an analogy to NLP research
efforts, namely to answer the question proposed
in Section 1 about how to attribute resources and
efforts on NLP research for social good.

The high-level intuitions are drawn from the
Important/Neglected/Tractable (INT) framework
(MacAskill, 2015), a commonly adopted frame-
work in global priorities research on social good.
Assume each agent has something to contribute
(e.g., money, effort, etc.). It is generally effective
to contribute to important, neglected, and tractable
areas.

4.2 Calculation of priority

Although the INT framework is commonly used
in practice of many philanthropy organizations
(MacAskill, 2015), it will be more helpful to for-
mulate it using mathematical terms and economic
concepts. Note that the terms we formulate in this
section can be regarded as elements in our pro-
posed thinking framework, but they are not directly
calculable.3

Our end goal is to estimate the cost-effectiveness
of contributing a unit time and effort of a certain
researcher or team to research on the technology t.
So far we have a meta framework to estimate the
impacts I brought by successful development of a
technology t. And we introduce the notations in
Table 1.

3We adapted these terms from GP. Such terms to estimate
priority has been successfully used by real-world social good
organizations, e.g., GiveWell, Global Priorities Institute, the
Open Philanthropy Project (a foundation with over 10 billion
USD investment), ReThink Priorities, 80,000 Hours Organi-
zation. In the long run, the NLP community may potentially
beneﬁt from aligning with GP’s terminology. Still, we do not
recommend applying our framework in high-stake settings yet,
since it serves only as a starting point currently.

r
T (r)

t
I(t)

prog(t)
p(t; r)

An NLP researcher or research group
The set of NLP topics that the researcher can
pursue (limited by skills, resources, and passion)
An NLP technology
Social impacts brought by successful develop-
ment of t
The current progress of t
Probability that research in t succeeds based on
the skills of the researcher r

p(t; r)I(t) Expected social impact of the researcher r’s

∆t(r)

work on t
Improvement of t per unit resource (incl. time,
effort, money, etc.) of the researcher r

Table 1: Notations and their corresponding meanings
used for cost-effectiveness calculation.

For a researcher r, the action set per unit re-
source is {∆t|t ∈ T (r)}. Equivalently speaking,
they can intervene at a node t by the amount of
∆t(r) in the structured causal graph G in Figure 3.

The ﬁrst useful concept is p(t; r)I(t), the ex-
pected social impact of research on a technology
t. Here the success rate p(t; r) is crucial because
most research does not necessarily produce the
expected outcome. However, if the impact of a
technology can be extremely large (for example,
prevention of extinction has impact near positive
inﬁnity), then even with a very little success rate,
we should still devote considerable efforts into it.

The second concept that is worth attention is
the marginal impact (Pindyck et al., 1995) of one
more unit of resources of the researcher r into the
technology t, calculated as

∆I(t; r) := I(prog(t) + ∆t(r)) − I(prog(t)) .

(3)

For example, if the ﬁeld associated with the tech-
nology is almost saturated, or if many other re-
searchers working on this ﬁeld are highly com-
petent, then, for a certain research group, blindly
devoting time to the ﬁeld may have little marginal
impact. However, on the other hand, if a ﬁeld is
important but neglected, the marginal impact of
pushing it forward can be large. This also explains
why researchers are passionate about creating a
new research ﬁeld.

The third useful concept is the opportunity cost
(Palmer and Raftery, 1999) to devote researcher
r’s resources into the technology t instead of a
possibly more optimal technology t(cid:63). Formally,

the opportunity cost is calculated as

t(cid:63)(r) := arg max

∆I(x(r)),

x
Cost(t; r) := ∆I(t(cid:63)(r); r) − ∆I(t; r) ,

(4)

(5)

where t(cid:63) is the optimal technology that can bring
the largest expected improvement of social impact.
The opportunity cost conveys the important mes-
sage that we should not just do good, but do the
best, because the difference from good to best can
be a large loss.

Estimating the variables. Note that the frame-
works we have proposed so far are at the meta level,
useful for guiding thought experiments, and future
research. Exact calculations are not possible with
the current state of research in NLP for social good,
although achievable in the future.

A practical insight is that NLP researchers es-
timate the impact of their research via qualitative
explanations (natural language) or rough quantita-
tive ones. For example, the introduction section of
most NLP papers or funding proposals is a natu-
ral language-based estimation of the impact of the
research. Such estimations can be useful to some
extent (Hubbard and Drummond, 2011), although
precise indicators of impact can motivate the work
more strongly.

We can also borrow some criteria from effec-
tive altruism, a global movement that establishes
a philosophical framework, and also statistical
calculations of social good. One of the estab-
lished metrics for calculating impact is called the
“quality-adjusted life years” (QALYs) proposed by
MacAskill (2015). QALYs count the number of
life years (calibrated by life quality such as health
conditions) that an act helps to increase.

5 Evaluating NLP tasks

In this section, we will ﬁrst try to categorize the
current state of NLP research for social good based
on ACL 2020 papers, and then highlight NLP top-
ics that are aligned with the UN’s SDGs. We will
conclude with a practical checklist and case studies
of common NLP tasks using this checklist.

5.1 Current state of NLP research for social
good – ACL 2020 as a case study

We want to compare the ideal priority list with the
current distribution of NLP papers for social good.
As a case study of the current research frontier,
we plot the topic distribution of the 89 ACL 2020

Figure 4: Social good topics at ACL 2020 by countries.

papers that are related to NLP for social good in
Figure 4. We also show the portion of papers by
the 10 countries with the most social-good papers.
Our annotation details are in Appendix A.

Illustrated in Figure 4, most social-good papers
work on interpretability, tackling misinformation
(e.g., fact-checking for news), and healthcare (e.g.,
to increase the capacity of doctors). In terms of
countries, the US has the most papers on inter-
pretability, and no papers on NLP for education,
NLP for legal applications, and some other topics.
China has few papers on interpretability, although
interpretability is the largest topic. India has no
papers on ﬁghting misinformation, although it is
the second largest topic. Only 5 countries have pub-
lications across more than two social good topics.
Please refer to Appendix B for more analyses such
as social-good papers by academia vs. industries.
However, compared with the UN’s SDGs
(United Nations, 2015), the current NLP research
(at least in the scope of ACL conference submis-
sions) lacks attention to other important cause areas
such as tackling global hunger, extreme poverty,
clean water and sanitation, and clean energy. There
are also too few research papers on NLP for educa-
tion, although education is the 4th most important
area in SDGs.

One cause of this difference is value misalign-
ment. Most NLP research is supported by stake-
holders and funding agencies, which have a large
impact on the current research trends or preferences
in the NLP community. The perspective from so-
cial good with a framework to calculate the priority
list has still not reached many in the NLP commu-
nity.

Although we do not have data on expenditure

Cause

Annual Spending (USD)

Global R&D
Luxury Goods
US Social Welfare
Climate Change
Global Poverty
Nuclear Security
Pandemic Prevention
AI Safety Research

1.5 trillion (UNESCO, 2017)
1.3 trillion (D’arpizio et al., 2015)
900 billion (Ferrara, 2011)
>300 billion (Buchner et al., 2014)
>250 billion (Todd, 2017)
1-10 billion (Todd, 2017)
1 billion (Todd, 2017)
10 million (Todd, 2017)

Table 2: Annual spending of the cause areas.

Priority Example NLP research topics

Poverty

• Predicting povery by geo-located Wikipedia

Hunger

Health
& Well-
being

articles (Sheehan et al., 2019)

• Parsing fund applicant proﬁles (proposed)
• NLP for agriculture (Yunpeng et al., 2019)
• NLP for food allocation (proposed)
• NLP to analyze clinical notes (Dernoncourt
et al., 2017a,b; Luo et al., 2018; Gopinath et al.,
2020; Leiter et al., 2020a,b)

• NLP for psychotherapy and counseling (Biester
et al., 2020; Xu et al., 2020; P´erez-Rosas et al.,
2019)

• NLP for happiness (Asai et al., 2018; Evensen

et al., 2019)

• Assistive speech generation (proposed)

Education • NLP for educational question answering (At-
apattu et al., 2015; Lende and Raghuwanshi,
2016)

• Improving textbooks (Agrawal et al., 2010)
• Automated grading (Madnani and Cahill, 2018;

Taghipour and Ng, 2016)

• Plagiarism detection (Chong et al., 2010)
• Tools for learners with disabilities (proposed)
• Interpretability (K¨ohn, 2015; Belinkov et al.,

Equality

2017; Nie et al., 2020)

• Ethics of NLP (Hovy and Spruit, 2016;

Stanovsky et al., 2019; Sap et al., 2019)

• NLP for low-resource languages (Zoph et al.,

2016; Kim et al., 2017)

• NLP on resource-limited devices (Sun et al.,

2020)

• NLP tools that signal bias in human language

and speech (proposed)

Clean
water
Clean
energy

(proposed)

et al., 2020)

• Green NLP (Strubell et al., 2019; Schwartz

• NLP to analyze cultural values regarding cli-
mate change (Jiang et al., 2017; Koenecke and
Feliu-Fab`a, 2019)

• Cross-cultural models of climate change per-

ceptions (proposed)

Table 3: Top priorities and some NLP research related
to each of them. This list may not be exhaustive. We
also propose a high-impact research problem in each of
the areas which has received less attention so far.

in each NLP subarea, we can get a glimpse of the
value misalignment in general. Table 2 shows the
annual spending of some cause areas. Note that
the ranking of the expenditure does not align with

our priority list for social good. For example, lux-
ury goods are not as important as global poverty,
but luxury goods cost 1.3 trillion USD each year,
almost ﬁve times the expenditure in global poverty.

5.2 Aligning NLP with social good

In this subsection, we list the top priorities accord-
ing to UN’s SDGs (United Nations, 2015). For
each goal, in Table 3 we include examples of exist-
ing NLP research, and suggest potential NLP tasks
that can be developed (labeled as (proposed)).

5.3 Checklist

As a practical guide, we compile the takeaways
of this paper into a list of heuristics that might be
helpful for future practioners of NLP for social
good. To inspect the social goodness of an NLP
research direction (especially in Stage 3-4), the
potential list of questions to answer is as follows:
(Q1) What kind of people/process will beneﬁt from

the technology?

(Q2) Does it reinforce the traditional structure of
beneﬁciaries? I.e., what groups of underpriv-
ileged people can be beneﬁted? (e.g., by
gender, demographics, socio-economic status,
country, native languages, disability type)

(Q3) Does it contribute to SDG priority goals such
as poverty, hunger, health, education, equality,
clean water, and clean energy?

(Q4) Can it directly improve quality of lives? E.g.,
how many QALYs might it result in?
(Q5) Does it count as (a) mitigating problems
brought by NLP, or (b) proactively helping
out-of-NLP social problems?

We conduct some case studies of NLP technologies
using the checklist.

Low-resource NLP & machine translation.
This category includes NLP on low-resource lan-
guages, such as NLP for Filipino (Sagum et al.,
2019; Cruz et al., 2020), and machine translation in
general. Because this direction expands the users
of NLP technologies from English-speaking peo-
ple to other languages, it beneﬁts people speaking
these languages (Q1), and helps to narrow the gap
between English-speaking and non-English speak-
ing end users (Q2), although it is still likely that
people who can afford intelligent devices will ben-
eﬁt more than those who cannot. This category
can contribute directly to goals such as equality

• Raising public awareness of water sanitation

5.4 Case studies by the checklist

and education, and indirectly to other goals be-
cause translation of documents in general helps the
sharing of information and knowledge (Q3). It di-
rectly improves quality of lives, for example, for
immigrants who may have difﬁculties with the lo-
cal language (Q4). Thus, it counts as social good
category (b) in (Q5).

interpretability,

algorithmic
Transparency,
fairness and bias. Research in this direction can
impact users who need more reliable decision-
making NLP, such as the selection process for
loans, jobs, criminal judgements, and medical
treatments (Q1). It can shorten the waiting time of
candidates and still make fair decisions regardless
of spurious correlations (Q2) (Q4).
It reduces
inequality raised by AI, but not increasing equality
over man-made decisions, at least by the current
technology (Q2). Thus, it is social good category
(a) in (Q5).

Green NLP. Green NLP reduces the energy con-
sumption of large-scale NLP models. Although
it works towards the goal of affordable and clean
energy (Q3) by neutralizing the negative impact of
training NLP models, but it does not impact out-
of-NLP energy problems. Green NLP belongs to
social good category (a) in (Q5). It does not have
large impacts directly targeted at (Q1), (Q2) and
(Q4).

QA & dialog. People who can afford devices em-
bedded with intelligent agents can use it, which is
about 48.46% of the global population (BankMy-
Cell, 2021) (Q1). So this beneﬁts people with
higher socio-economic status, and beneﬁts English
speaking people more than others, not to mention
job replacements for labor-intensive service posi-
tions (Q2). It does not contribute to priority goals
except for education and healthcare for people who
can afford intelligent devices (Q3). Nonetheless, it
can improve the quality of lives for its user group
(Q4). It can be regarded as social good of category
(b) in (Q5).

Information extraction, NLP-powered search
engine & summarization. This direction speeds
up the information compilation process, which can
increase the productivity in many areas. About
50% of the world population have access to the
Internet and thus can use it (Meeker, 2019) (Q1)
(Q2). This category indirectly helps education, and
the information compilation process of other goals

(Q3). It can largely improve the lives of its user
group because people gather information very fre-
quently (e.g., do at least one Google search every
day) (Q4). Thus, it belongs to social good category
(b) in (Q5).

NLP for social media. Research on social media
provides tools for multiple parties. Social scientists
can mine interesting trends and cultural phenom-
ena; politicians can survey constituents’ opinions
and inﬂuence them; companies can investigate user
interests and expand their markets (Q1). The caveat
of dual use is large, and heavily rely on the stake-
holders’ intent: exploitation of the tools will lead
to bleach of user privacy, and information manip-
ulation, whereas good use of the tools can help
evidence-based policy makers (social good cate-
gory (a) in (Q5)), and help to understand the driv-
ing principles of democratic behavior and combat
the mechanisms that undermine it (social good cat-
egory (b) in (Q5)). Such diverse possibilities of
parties who use them leave (Q2) and (Q4) unan-
swerable. Also, this research direction has limited
(and often indirect) contribution to priorities such
as poverty and hunger, unless the related policies
are in heat discussion online (Q3).

6 Conclusion

This paper presented a meta framework to evaluate
NLP tasks in the light of social good, and proposed
a practical guide for practitioners in NLP. We call
for more attention towards awareness and catego-
rization of social impact of NLP research, and we
envision future NLP research taking on an impor-
tant social role and contributing to multiple priority
areas. We also acknowledge the iterative nature
of this emerging ﬁeld, requiring continuing discus-
sions, improvements to our thinking framework
and different ways to implement it in practice. We
highlight that the goal of our work is to take one
step closer to a comprehensive understanding of
social good rather than introducing a deterministic
answer about how to maximize social good with
NLP applications.

Acknowledgments

We thank Bernhard Schoelkopf, Kevin Jin, and
Qipeng Guo for insightful discussions on the main
ideas and methodology of the paper. We thank Os-
mond Wang for checking the economic concepts
in the paper. We also thank Chris Brockett for

checking many details in the paper. We thank the
labmates in the LIT lab at University of Michi-
gan, especially Laura Biester, Ian Stewart, Ashkan
Kazemi, and Andrew Lee for constructive feed-
back. We also thank labmates at the MIT MEDG
group, especially William Boag and Peter Szolovits
for their constructive feedback. We also received
many feedbacks based on the ﬁrst version of the
paper, – we thank Niklas Stoehr for constructive
suggestions to help some arguments be more com-
prehensive in the current version. We thank Jingwei
Ni for the help with the annotation of the country
and afﬁliation of the ACL 2020 papers.

Ethical and societal implications

Our paper establishes a framework to better under-
stand the deﬁnition of social good in the context
of NLP research, and lays out a recommended di-
rection on how to achieve it. The contributions of
our paper could beneﬁt a focused, organized and
accountable development of NLP for social good.
The data used in our work is public, and without
privacy concerns.

References

Rakesh Agrawal, Sreenivas Gollapudi, Krishnaram
Kenthapadi, Nitish Srivastava, and Raja Velu. 2010.
In Pro-
Enriching textbooks through data mining.
ceedings of the First ACM Symposium on Comput-
ing for Development, pages 1–9.

Firoj Alam, Fahim Dalvi, Shaden Shaar, Nadir Durrani,
Hamdy Mubarak, Alex Nikolov, Giovanni Da San
Martino, Ahmed Abdelali, Hassan Sajjad, Kareem
Darwish, et al. 2020. Fighting the covid-19 info-
demic in social media: a holistic perspective and a
call to arms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.07996.

Akari Asai, Sara Evensen, Behzad Golshan, Alon Y.
Halevy, Vivian Li, Andrei Lopatenko, Daniela
Stepanov, Yoshihiko Suhara, Wang-Chiew Tan, and
Yinzhan Xu. 2018. HappyDB: A corpus of 100, 000
In Proceedings of
crowdsourced happy moments.
the Eleventh International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation, LREC 2018, Miyazaki,
Japan, May 7-12, 2018. European Language Re-
sources Association (ELRA).

Association for Computational Linguistics. 2021.

Ethics FAQ at ACL-IJCNLP 2021.

Thushari Atapattu, Katrina Falkner, and Nickolas
Falkner. 2015. Educational question answering mo-
tivated by question-speciﬁc concept maps. In Inter-
national Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Ed-
ucation, pages 13–22. Springer.

BankMyCell. 2021. How many smartphones are in the

world?

Yonatan Belinkov, Llu´ıs M`arquez, Hassan Sajjad,
Nadir Durrani, Fahim Dalvi, and James Glass. 2017.
Evaluating layers of representation in neural ma-
chine translation on part-of-speech and semantic
In Proceedings of the Eighth In-
tagging tasks.
ternational Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 1–10,
Taipei, Taiwan. Asian Federation of Natural Lan-
guage Processing.

Emily M Bender, Timnit Gebru, Angelina McMillan-
Major, and Shmargaret Shmitchell. 2021. On the
dangers of stochastic parrots: Can language models
be too big. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference
on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency.

Parminder Bhatia, Kristjan Arumae, Nima Pour-
Suyog Deshpande, Ben Snively,
damghani,
Mona Mona,
Price,
Shyam Ramaswamy, and Taha Kass-Hout. 2020.
AWS CORD19-search: A scientiﬁc literature
arXiv preprint
search engine for COVID-19.
arXiv:2007.09186.

Colby Wise, George

Laura Biester, Katie Matton, Janarthanan Rajendran,
Emily Mower Provost, and Rada Mihalcea. 2020.
Quantifying the effects of COVID-19 on mental
In Proceedings of the 1st
health support forums.
Workshop on NLP for COVID-19 (Part 2) at EMNLP
2020, Online. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Su Lin Blodgett, Solon Barocas, Hal Daum´e III, and
Hanna Wallach. 2020. Language (technology) is
power: A critical survey of “bias” in NLP. In Pro-
ceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pages 5454–
5476, Online. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

David Bourget and David J Chalmers. 2014. What
Philosophical studies,

do philosophers believe?
170(3):465–500.

John Broome. 2017. Weighing goods: Equality, uncer-

tainty and time. John Wiley & Sons.

Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie
Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind
Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda
Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss,
Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child,
Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu,
Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen,
Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin
Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam Mc-
Candlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario
Amodei. 2020. Language models are few-shot learn-
ers. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 33: Annual Conference on Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, De-
cember 6-12, 2020, virtual.

Barbara Buchner, Morgan Herve-Mignucci, Chiara
Jane Wilkinson, Martin Stadelmann,
Trabacchi,
Rodney Boyd, Federico Mazza, Angela Falconer,
and Valerio Micale. 2014. Global landscape of cli-
mate ﬁnance 2015. Climate Policy Initiative, 32.

Joy Buolamwini and Timnit Gebru. 2018. Gender
shades: Intersectional accuracy disparities in com-
mercial gender classiﬁcation. In Conference on fair-
ness, accountability and transparency, pages 77–91.
PMLR.

Davide Castelvecchi. 2020.

Prestigious ai meeting

takes steps to improve ethics of research. Nature.

Irene Y Chen, Peter Szolovits, and Marzyeh Ghassemi.
2019. Can ai help reduce disparities in general med-
ical and mental health care? AMA journal of ethics,
21(2):167–179.

Miranda Chong, Lucia Specia, and Ruslan Mitkov.
2010. Using natural language processing for auto-
In Proceedings of
matic detection of plagiarism.
the 4th International Plagiarism Conference (IPC-
2010).

Hyunji Chung, Michaela Iorga, Jeffrey Voas, and
Sangjin Lee. 2017. Alexa, can i trust you? Com-
puter, 50(9):100–104.

Jan Christian Blaise Cruz, Jose Kristian Resabal, James
Lin, Dan John Velasco, and Charibeth Cheng. 2020.
Investigating the true performance of transformers in
low-resource languages: A case study in automatic
corpus creation. CoRR, abs/2010.11574.

Claudia D’arpizio, Federica Levato, Daniele Zito, and
Joelle de Montgolﬁer. 2015. Luxury goods world-
wide market study. Bain & Company’s report.

Franck Dernoncourt, Ji Young Lee, and Peter Szolovits.
2017a. NeuroNER: an easy-to-use program for
named-entity recognition based on neural networks.
In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing: Sys-
tem Demonstrations, pages 97–102. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Franck Dernoncourt, Ji Young Lee, Ozlem Uzuner,
and Peter Szolovits. 2017b. De-identiﬁcation of pa-
tient notes with recurrent neural networks. Journal
of the American Medical Informatics Association,
24(3):596–606.

Sara Evensen, Yoshihiko Suhara, Alon Y. Halevy, Vi-
vian Li, Wang-Chiew Tan, and Saran Mumick. 2019.
Happiness entailment: Automating suggestions for
well-being. In 8th International Conference on Af-
fective Computing and Intelligent Interaction, ACII
2019, Cambridge, United Kingdom, September 3-6,
2019, pages 62–68. IEEE.

Peter Ferrara. 2011. America’s ever expanding welfare

empire. Forbes, April, 22.

Anjalie Field, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Maarten Sap, Zhi-
jing Jin, Jieyu Zhao, and Chris Brockett. 2020. 1st
workshop on nlp for positive impact.

Elizabeth Gibney. 2020. The battle for ethical ai at the
world’s biggest machine-learning conference. Na-
ture, 577(7792):609–609.

Divya Gopinath, Monica Agrawal, Luke Murray,
Steven Horng, David Karger, and David Sontag.
2020. Fast, structured clinical documentation via
contextual autocomplete. In Machine Learning for
Healthcare Conference, pages 842–870. PMLR.

Hilary Greaves and William McAskill. 2017. A re-
search agenda for the Global Priorities Institute.
University of Oxford, London.

Tamanna Hossain, Robert L. Logan IV, Arjuna Ugarte,
Yoshitomo Matsubara, Sean Young, and Sameer
Singh. 2020. COVIDLies: Detecting COVID-19
misinformation on social media. In Proceedings of
the 1st Workshop on NLP for COVID-19 (Part 2)
at EMNLP 2020, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Dirk Hovy, Shannon Spruit, Margaret Mitchell,
Emily M. Bender, Michael Strube, and Hanna Wal-
lach, editors. 2017. Proceedings of the First ACL
Workshop on Ethics in Natural Language Process-
ing. Association for Computational Linguistics, Va-
lencia, Spain.

Dirk Hovy and Shannon L Spruit. 2016. The social
impact of natural language processing. In Proceed-
ings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Pa-
pers), pages 591–598.

Douglas W Hubbard and David Drummond. 2011.
How to measure anything. Wiley Online Library.

Ye Jiang, Xingyi Song, Jackie Harrison, Shaun Quegan,
and Diana Maynard. 2017. Comparing attitudes to
climate change in the media using sentiment analy-
sis based on latent dirichlet allocation. In Proceed-
ings of the 2017 Workshop: Natural Language Pro-
cessing meets Journalism, NLPmJ@EMNLP, Copen-
hagen, Denmark, September 7, 2017, pages 25–30.
Association for Computational Linguistics.

Anna Jobin, Marcello Ienca, and Effy Vayena. 2019.
The global landscape of ai ethics guidelines. Nature
Machine Intelligence, 1(9):389–399.

Shelly Kagan. 2018. Normative ethics. Routledge.

Jackson A Killian, Bryan Wilder, Amit Sharma, Vinod
Choudhary, Bistra Dilkina, and Milind Tambe. 2019.
Learning to prescribe interventions for tuberculosis
In Proceed-
patients using digital adherence data.
ings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Con-
ference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining,
pages 2430–2438.

Joo-Kyung Kim, Young-Bum Kim, Ruhi Sarikaya, and
Eric Fosler-Lussier. 2017. Cross-lingual transfer
learning for pos tagging without cross-lingual re-
sources. In Proceedings of the 2017 conference on
empirical methods in natural language processing,
pages 2832–2838.

Allison Koenecke and Jordi Feliu-Fab`a. 2019. Learn-
ing twitter user sentiments on climate change with
limited labeled data. CoRR, abs/1904.07342.

Arne K¨ohn. 2015. What’s in an embedding? analyzing
word embeddings through multilingual evaluation.
In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
2067–2073.

Thomas S Kuhn. 2012. The structure of scientiﬁc revo-

lutions. University of Chicago press.

Vasileios Lampos, Simon Moura, Elad Yom-Tov, Inge-
mar J Cox, Rachel McKendry, and Michael Edel-
stein. 2020.
Tracking COVID-19 using online
search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.08086.

Jochen L Leidner and Vassilis Plachouras. 2017. Eth-
ical by design: Ethics best practices for natural lan-
guage processing. In Proceedings of the First ACL
Workshop on Ethics in Natural Language Process-
ing, pages 30–40.

Richard Leiter, Enrico Santus, Zhijing Jin, Katherine
Lee, Miryam Yusufov, Edward Moseley, Yujie Qian,
Jiang Guo, and Charlotta Lindvall. 2020a. An arti-
ﬁcial intelligence algorithm to identify documented
symptoms in patients with heart failure who received
cardiac resynchronization therapy (s717). Journal
of Pain and Symptom Management, 59(2):537–538.

Richard E Leiter, Enrico Santus, Zhijing Jin, Kather-
ine C Lee, Miryam Yusufov, Isabel Chien, Ashwin
Ramaswamy, Edward T Moseley, Yujie Qian, Debo-
rah Schrag, et al. 2020b. Deep natural language pro-
cessing to identify symptom documentation in clin-
ical notes for patients with heart failure undergoing
cardiac resynchronization therapy. Journal of Pain
and Symptom Management, 60(5):948–958.

Sweta P Lende and MM Raghuwanshi. 2016. Ques-
tion answering system on education acts using nlp
techniques. In 2016 world conference on futuristic
trends in research and innovation for social welfare
(Startup Conclave), pages 1–6. IEEE.

Margaux Luck, Jonnie Penn, Tristan Sylvain, Mark
Crowley, Joseph Paul Cohen, Margaux Luck, Sean
McGregor, Myriam Cˆot´e, Valentine Goddard, Mar-
gaux Luck, Kenny Chen, Arsene Fansi Tchango,
Joseph Paul Cohen, and Yoshua Bengio. 2018. Ai
for social good workshop.

Yuan Luo, Yu Cheng, ¨Ozlem Uzuner, Peter Szolovits,
and Justin Starren. 2018. Segment convolutional
neural networks (seg-cnns) for classifying relations
in clinical notes. Journal of the American Medical
Informatics Association, 25(1):93–98.

Michael MacAskill, Krister Bykvist, and Toby Ord.
2020. Moral uncertainty. Oxford University Press.

William MacAskill. 2015. Doing good better: Effec-
tive altruism and a radical new way to make a differ-
ence. Guardian Faber Publishing.

Nitin Madnani and Aoife Cahill. 2018. Automated
scoring: Beyond natural language processing.
In
Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on
Computational Linguistics, pages 1099–1109.

Mary Meeker. 2019. Internet trends report; 2019.

Margaret Mitchell, Simone Wu, Andrew Zaldivar,
Parker Barnes, Lucy Vasserman, Ben Hutchinson,
Elena Spitzer, Inioluwa Deborah Raji, and Timnit
Gebru. 2019. Model cards for model reporting. In
Proceedings of the conference on fairness, account-
ability, and transparency, pages 220–229.

Yixin Nie, Adina Williams, Emily Dinan, Mohit
Bansal, Jason Weston, and Douwe Kiela. 2020. Ad-
versarial NLI: A new benchmark for natural lan-
guage understanding. In Proceedings of the 58th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 4885–4901, Online. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

Stephen Palmer and James Raftery. 1999. Opportunity

cost. Bmj, 318(7197):1551–1552.

Judea Pearl. 1995. Causal diagrams for empirical re-

search. Biometrika, 82(4):669–688.

Ver´onica P´erez-Rosas, Xinyi Wu, Kenneth Resnicow,
and Rada Mihalcea. 2019. What makes a good coun-
selor? learning to distinguish between high-quality
In Pro-
and low-quality counseling conversations.
ceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, pages 926–935,
Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Robert S Pindyck, Daniel L Rubinfeld, and Prem L
Mehta. 1995. Microeconomics, volume 4. Prentice
Hall Englewood Cliffs, NJ.

Inioluwa Deborah Raji, Andrew Smart, Rebecca N
White, Margaret Mitchell, Timnit Gebru, Ben
Hutchinson, Jamila Smith-Loud, Daniel Theron, and
Parker Barnes. 2020. Closing the ai accountability
gap: deﬁning an end-to-end framework for internal
In Proceedings of the 2020
algorithmic auditing.
Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Trans-
parency, pages 33–44.

Ria Ambrocio Sagum, Aldrin D Ramos,

and
Monique T Llanes. 2019. Ficobu: Filipino wordnet
construction using decision tree and language mod-
International Journal of Machine Learning
eling.
and Computing, 9(1):103–107.

Maarten Sap, Dallas Card, Saadia Gabriel, Yejin Choi,
and Noah A Smith. 2019. The risk of racial bias in
In Proceedings of the 57th
hate speech detection.

2020. Ai for social good: unlocking the opportu-
nity for positive impact. Nature Communications,
11(1):1–6.

Hilary Townsend. 2013. Natural language processing
and clinical outcomes: the promise and progress of
nlp for improved care. Journal of AHIMA, 84(2):44–
45.

UNESCO. 2017. Facts and ﬁgures: R&d expenditure.

United Nations. 2015. UN Sustainable Development

Goals.

Voicebot. 2020. Amazon Echo & Alexa stats.

Lucy Lu Wang, Kyle Lo, Yoganand Chandrasekhar,
Russell Reas, Jiangjiang Yang, Darrin Eide, Kathryn
Funk, Rodney Kinney, Ziyang Liu, William Merrill,
et al. 2020. Cord-19: The COVID-19 open research
dataset. ArXiv.

Charles Welch, Allison Lahnala, Veronica Perez-Rosas,
Siqi Shen, Sarah Seraj, Larry An, Kenneth Resni-
cow, James Pennebaker, and Rada Mihalcea. 2020.
Expressive interviewing: A conversational system
for coping with COVID-19. In Proceedings of the
1st Workshop on NLP for COVID-19 (Part 2) at
EMNLP 2020, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.

Zhentao Xu, Ver´onica P´erez-Rosas, and Rada Mihal-
cea. 2020.
Inferring social media users’ mental
health status from multimodal information. In Pro-
ceedings of the 12th Language Resources and Eval-
uation Conference, pages 6292–6299, Marseille,
France. European Language Resources Association.

Cui Yunpeng, Wang Jian, and Liu Juan. 2019. The de-
velopment of deep learning based natural language
processing (nlp) technology and applications in agri-
culture. Journal of Agricultural Big Data, 1(1):38.

Yi Zeng, Enmeng Lu, and Cunqing Huangfu. 2019.
In Work-
Linking artiﬁcial intelligence principles.
shop on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence Safety 2019 co-
located with the Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence 2019 (AAAI-19), Honolulu,
Hawaii, January 27, 2019, volume 2301 of CEUR
Workshop Proceedings. CEUR-WS.org.

Barret Zoph, Deniz Yuret, Jonathan May, and Kevin
Knight. 2016. Transfer learning for low-resource
In Proceedings of the
neural machine translation.
2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing, pages 1568–1575, Austin,
Texas. Association for Computational Linguistics.

annual meeting of the association for computational
linguistics, pages 1668–1678.

Roy Schwartz, Jesse Dodge, Noah A. Smith, and
Oren Etzioni. 2020. Green ai. Commun. ACM,
63(12):54–63.

Saqib Shah and Julian Chokkattu. 2016. Microsoft
kills AI chatbot Tay (twice) after it goes full Nazi.

Evan Sheehan, Chenlin Meng, Matthew Tan, Burak
Uzkent, Neal Jean, Marshall Burke, David B. Lo-
bell, and Stefano Ermon. 2019.
Predicting eco-
nomic development using geolocated wikipedia ar-
In Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD
ticles.
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery
& Data Mining, KDD 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA,
August 4-8, 2019, pages 2698–2706. ACM.

Henry Sidgwick. 1874.
Macmillan and Co.

The methods of ethics.

Gabriel Stanovsky, Noah A. Smith, and Luke Zettle-
moyer. 2019. Evaluating gender bias in machine
translation. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.

Emma Strubell, Ananya Ganesh, and Andrew Mc-
Energy and policy considera-
arXiv preprint

Callum. 2019.
tions for deep learning in nlp.
arXiv:1906.02243.

Dan Su, Yan Xu, Tiezheng Yu, Farhad Bin Siddique,
Elham Barezi, and Pascale Fung. 2020. CAiRE-
COVID: A question answering and query-focused
multi-document summarization system for COVID-
19 scholarly information management. In Proceed-
ings of the 1st Workshop on NLP for COVID-19
(Part 2) at EMNLP 2020, Online. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Zhiqing Sun, Hongkun Yu, Xiaodan Song, Renjie Liu,
Yiming Yang, and Denny Zhou. 2020. Mobilebert:
a compact task-agnostic BERT for resource-limited
In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meet-
devices.
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
ACL 2020, Online, July 5-10, 2020, pages 2158–
2170. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Kaveh Taghipour and Hwee Tou Ng. 2016. A neural
In Proceed-
approach to automated essay scoring.
ings of the 2016 conference on empirical methods in
natural language processing, pages 1882–1891.

Judith Jarvis Thomson. 1976. Killing, letting die, and
the trolley problem. The Monist, 59(2):204–217.

Benjamin Todd. 2017. The case for reducing existen-

tial risks.

Nenad Tomaˇsev,

Julien Cornebise, Frank Hutter,
Shakir Mohamed, Angela Picciariello, Bec Con-
nelly, Danielle CM Belgrave, Daphne Ezer,
Fanny Cachat van der Haert, Frank Mugisha, et al.

A ACL 2020 paper annotations

For the case study on ACL 2020 papers, such as
Figure 2 and 4, we collect the 570 long papers at
ACL 2020. An NLP researcher with four years of
research experience conducted the entire annota-
tion, so that the categorization is consistent across
all papers.4

The ﬁrst annotation task is to categorize
all papers into one of the four stages in the
theory→application development. We showed the
annotator the description of the four stages in Sec-
tion 3.1. Next, provided with the title, abstract, and
PDF of each paper, the annotator was asked to an-
notate which of the four stages each paper belongs
to. The annotator had passed a test batch before
starting the large-scale annotation.

The second annotation task is to annotate the
research topics of the papers related to social good
at ACL 2020. If the paper has a clear social good
impact (89 out of 570 papers), the annotator needs
to classify the topic of the paper into one of the
given categories: bias mitigation, education, equal-
ity, ﬁghting misinformation, green NLP, healthcare,
interpretability, legal applications, low-resource
language, mental healthcare, robustness, science
literature parsing, and others. For the other meta
information such as countries, or academia vs. in-
dustry, we decide based on the information of the
leading ﬁrst author.

B More statistics about ACL 2020 papers

For the case study on ACL 2020 papers, we further
investigate the following statistics.

Stage 1-4 by countries. Recall that in Figure 2
of the main paper, we plot the distributions of pa-
pers by the four stages, and highlight the most
frequent topics in each stage. Additionally, it is
also interesting to explore the distribution of stages
for different countries. In Figure 5, we have the
following observations:

China does not have Stage-1 papers (i.e., funda-
mental theories), although it has the second largest
total number of papers. The reason might be that
there are not many Chinese researchers on linguis-
tic theories who publish at English conferences.

Most countries’ number of papers in the four
stages follows the overall trend (i.e., Stage-2 pa-
pers > Stage-3 papers > Stage-4 papers > Stage-1

4The annotation ﬁle has been uploaded to the softconf

system.

papers), with a few exceptions. For example, China
has almost the same number of papers in Stage 2
and 3, Germany has more papers in Stage 4 (i.e.,
deployed applications) than in Stage 3, and Canada
has the most papers in Stage 3.

Figure 5: Stage 1-4 of ACL 2020 papers by countries.

Social good topics by academia vs.
industry.
As we call for more research attention to NLP for
social good, it is important to understand the afﬁl-
iations behind the current social good papers. A
coarse way is to look at the afﬁliation of the ﬁrst
author, and inspect whether the main work of the
paper is done by people from academia or industry.

Figure 6: Social good topics at ACL 2020 by afﬁlia-
tions.

As in Figure 6, overall academia publishes sev-
eral times more papers on social good than the
industry. This ratio is higher than the average ra-
tio of papers from academia out of all ACL 2020
papers (389 from academia out of 570). Industry
does not have ACL 2020 papers on topics such as

NLP ethics. Note that using statistics from ACL
papers alone could be limiting because researchers
in academia typically present almost all research
achievements through publications, but many in-
dustry researchers do not publish in public venues
such as ACL, although their research may impact
various products.

